211 Find the resulting value
Given the function f(x), where x is an integer. You should compute  f1024(x), where fn(x)=f(f(...f(x)...)) n times, for
example, f2(x)=f(f(x)) Recursion is prohibited; so you are allowed to use only simpler language constructions
(functions, expressions, variables). When solving this problem you should assume that function f is already declared and
implemented. You should read an integer x from the input, and output the resulting value of f1024(x), using the print
function.

212 Positive filter
Write the function filter_positive, which takes a list of numbers as input, and, not changing this list, returns the new
list containing only the positive elements of it. You should not write input and output, only a function.

213 Exclude duplicates
Write a program, which takes the list of numbers and creates a new list, which contains all the elements of this list,
excluding duplicates. Write your solutions as a function f(ls).

214 Fibonacci
Write a program with the function fib(n), which returns the n-th Fibonacci number by the given non-negative integer n.
You can't use loops in this problem – use the recursion. Your program should read the n, call the fib(n) function and
print the answer.

215 Sum of numbers
Given the sequence of numbers, ending with number 0. Find the sum of all these numbers without using a loop.

216 Skyscraper
The skyscraper has n floors. It is known that if you drop the glass ball from the floor p and it breaks, if you drop it
from the floor p+1 it will also break. It is also known that the ball always breaks if you drop it from the last floor.
You need to determine the minimum floor number, falling from which the ball will break. You have two balls to perform
the experiment. You can break them both, but you need to provide the exact correct number after that. Find out what
number of throws is enough to solve this task.

217 Power 3
Given a real positive number a and an integer number n.Find an. You need to write the whole program with a recursive
function power(a, n).


218 N-th power
It is possible to find a n-th power much quicker than by making n multiplications! To do this you need to use the
following recurrence relations: an=(a2)n/2 for even n, an=a×an−1 for odd n. Implement the algorithm of quick
exponentiating using a recursion function. Given a real number a and a non-negative integer n.

219 Decompositions
Given the integer N (1≤N≤40). List all the decompositions of N into the whole positive addends. The addends should go in
non-ascending order within each decomposition. Output all decompositions in the lexicographical order.

220 k-combination
Implement the program, which calculates C(n, k) for the specified n and k.

221 Tower of Hanoi
Tower of Hanoi is one of the well-known puzzles with the following rules. Given three rods (let's number them as 1, 2
and 3). The first rod has n rings on it with radius from 1 to n. Rings are ordered by radius, and the largest of the
rings lies below all others. You should write an algorithm to move all n rings from the first rod to the third rod,
sticking to the following rules:
Only one disk can be moved at a time.
No disk may be placed on top of a smaller disk.
The program should output the shortest sequence of actions required to move all the rings from the 1 rod to the 3 one.

222 Koch curve
Write a program that takes number n as input − the number of iterations to generate curve, and outputs the sequence of
turn angles when drawing a corresponding line from the start to the end point, without leaving the pen.

223 Collatz conjecture
Given natural number n. Generate a sequence of integers, described in the Collatz conjecture: If n is an even number,
divide it in half, if it is odd, multiply it by 3 and add 1. Repeat this operation until we get the number 1 as a result.

224 Double factorial
Implement a function to compute the double factorial, that is the product of natural numbers with the same parity and
not exceeding a given number. The function argument can be any non-negative integer.

225_The_first_and_the_last_elements
Write a program, which gets as input the list of numbers (for example, a=[5,10,15,20,25]) and creates a new list,
consisting of the first and the last elements of the given list. Write a solution with the use of the function.

226 Find number
Given positive integer N. Find the number of positive integers less than N such that their sum of digits (in decimal
notation) is equal to the sum of digits in the number N. Output the number of such integers.

227 Interpreter of the mathematical expression
Write a simple interpreter of the mathematical expression. The input is a string with expression, consisting of two
numbers, connected by a binary operator: a operator b, where instead of operator the following words can be used: plus,
minus, multiply, divide - for addition, subtraction, multiplication and integer division respectively.

228 Mod checker
Implement the mod_checker(x, mod=0) function, which will generate lambda function of the single argument y, which will
return True, if the remainder of dividing y by x equals to mod, and False otherwise.

229 A bit harder
The input of this problem in a Python code; each line may contain one assignment, but with a several variables. You need
to find all uncommented assignments and for each of them output the space separated number of the line (in which it
occurs) and the name of each variable (in the same order as they are in the assignment).

230 Repeats
This problem has an input text - the list of phone numbers (one phone number per line). Your task is to check whether
these phone numbers are "cool": the phone number is called "cool", if it contains 3 or more of the same digits in a row.
For example, number 19992034050 is a "cool" one, but 19500237492 is not. Your task is to leave only the cool numbers:
standard output should contain the "cool" numbers, each number on a separate line.

231 Grouping
For this problem, input is the code in Python. Your task is to find all the assignment in this code, and output, where
they occurred and the value of what variable they have changed! Please remember, that according to the PEP 8 standard,
the assignment operator is separated by a single space from both ends (unlike passing an argument). This way an
assignment is deemed valid and we consider that (something, consisting only from letters, numbers and underscore) =
(something). In this problem we consider that a line may contain only one assignment and only to one variable. For each
assignment, you need to output in a separate line – the line number (line numbers are numbered from one) and the name of
the variable, whose value has been changed. Line numbers must be in ascending order.

232 Replacement
Task is to keep only words separated by a space (you need to get rid of all the other characters, whether they are line
breaks, commas or periods).

233 Sets of symbols
In this problem, you get text as input. By using regular expressions you should find all occurrences of the "you" or
"You" in it and output the number of occurrences.

234 Character by character match
In this problem the input is text. Using regular expressions, find all occurrences of the "you" substring in it and
display its number. This problem is case-sensitive.

235 Vehicle registration number
Write a program that uses regular expressions to check whether the input string is a vehicle registration number.
Vehicle registration number has the following format: ?***??, where ? – a Latin symbol from the set [A, B, E, K, M, H,
O, P, C, T, Y, X], and * – any digit from 0 to 9. The program should output Yes or No.

236 Phone number
Write a program that uses regular expressions to check whether the input string is a phone number. A phone number has
the following form: 19∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗∗, where ∗ is any number from 0 to 9. The program should print Yes or No.

237 Secure sum
Implement the sum function, which accepts two arguments and behaves the following way. If the type of at least one of
the arguments is not int , the function throws TypeError. If the type of both arguments are not int, i.e. are integers,
but at least one of the numbers is not a positive one, the function throws ValueError. Otherwise, the function returns
the sum of the arguments.

238 Catch me, if you can
In this problem, your program will be able to call the foo function, which does not take any arguments. The foo function
may throw one of the following three exceptions: AssertionError, MemoryError and RuntimeError. In your program you need
to call the foo function, catch a thrown exception and, depending on the type of exception, output "Caught <name of the
exception>". For example, if the foo function throws AssertionError, you need to output "Caught AssertionError" (output
the message without the quotation marks). Your program should not declare the foo function, it should only call it.

239 Exceptions on the stack
You are given a description of the current state of the program. Up to this point, we’ve made the chain of function
calls and the latest called function currently handles the exception. You are given the stack of functions calls, the
behaviour of the functions when handling various exceptions and the name of the currently processed exception.
Functions can operate with an exception as follows.
The function does not handle (does not catch) the exception. In this case, the function is removed from the call stack,
and the exception is thrown further.
The function handles the exception and throws a new exception. In this case, the function is removed from the call stack
and the new exception is thrown further.
The function handles the exception and continues to work correctly. In this case, the function remains on the stack of
calls and no new exceptions are generated.


240 Exeptions 2
Write a function  get_int(start_message, error_message, end_message), taking three strings as arguments. The function
should ask users for the input until an integer is entered (a string, which is accepted by the int function without
errors).ore the first request you should enter the  start_message, argument, after each faulty input you should output
the value of the string error_message and in case of a successful input - the string end_message and return the received
integer from the function (see example below). Each output message should be on a separate line.

241 Exceptions
Your program will have an access to foo function, which can throw exceptions. You need to write a code, which launches
this function and than catches the ArithmeticError, AssertionError, ZeroDivisionError exceptions and outputs the name of
the caught exception.

242 Positive list
Implement the class PositiveList which stores positive integers, by inheriting it from the class list. Also implement
the new exception NonPositiveError. In the class PositiveList redefine the method append(self, x) in such a way that
when someone tries to add a non-positive integer, it throws an exception NonPositiveError. In case of a positive
integer, it should be appended as in a standard list. In this problem it is guaranteed that an integer will always be
passed as an argument x for the append method.

243 Awkward situation
You are given a description of the exception classes inheritance in the following format.
<exception name 1> : <exception name 2> <exception name 3> ... <exception name k>
It means that exception 1 is inherited from exception 2, exception 3, etc.

244 The average height of a student
There is a file with the table in TSV format, containing the information regarding height of the students from different
grades. Write a program that reads the file and calculates the average height of a student for each grade. The file
consists of a set of lines, each of which represents three fields: Grade Surname Height
Only a number marks the grade. Letter modifiers are not used. The grade number can be from 1 to 11 inclusive. There are
no spaces in the surnames, and the height is expressed as a natural number, but when calculating the average you need to
calculate the value in the form of a real number. You should output the information on the average height in ascending
order of the grade number (for the grades from the first to the twelve). If there is no information about some grade,
output a dash, see example.

245 Repetition coding
Encoding of repeats is carried as the following: s = 'aaaabbсaa' is converted into 'a4b2с1a2', that is, the groups of
the same characters of the input string are replaced by the symbol and the number of its repetitions in this string.
Write a program that reads a line from the file corresponding to the string, compressed using the repetition coding, and
performs the reverse operation, obtaining the source string. Output the obtained string into a file and attach it as a
solution to this problem. The original string does not contain any numbers; it means that the code is definitely
interpretable.

246 The most frequent word
Write a program that reads the text from the file (the file may contain more than one line) and outputs the most
frequent word in the text, and after a space - how many times it occurred. If there are several such words, output the
first one in a lexicographical order (you can use the < operator for the strings). The words written in different
registers (cases) are considered to be the same.

247 Students’ performance data
There is a file with the students’ performance data. It consists of a set of rows, where the following information is
stored in each of the rows: Surname;Math_grade;Physics_grade;English_grade
All the fields within the row are separated by semicolon. All the grades are integers. Write a program that reads a file
with this structure, and for each of the students it outputs his average grade for these three subjects on a separate
line, corresponding to this particular student. In addition, a separate line at the end of the file should contain the
average grade for math, physics and English for all students, separated by a space.

248 Next file
Given a set of files, each of which (except the last one) contains a name of the next file. First word in the text of
the last file: "We". Download the provided file. It contains a link to the first file from this set. All files are
located in the catalogue at https://stepic.org/media/attachments/course67/3.6.3/ Upload the content of the last file
from the set as a solution for this problem.

249 Generate the new text file
Given a text file that contains some number of non-empty lines. Using this file, generate the new text file, which
contains the same lines in the reversed order.

250 Even-numbered lines
Given: A file containing at most 1000 lines. Return: A file containing all the even-numbered lines from the original
file. Assume 1-based numbering of lines. Please copy the content of output file into the text field below.

251 LCD-calculator
Given a sequence of digits, write a program, which outputs these digits in the style of an LCD-calculator (see example).
The size of all digits is 4 symbols in width and 7 symbols in height. There should be one empty column between the
digits in the output. There should be no spaces before the first digit. Digits in the output should be framed, corners
of this frame should contain the x symbols, a horizontal line if created by the - symbol ("hyphen"), and the vertical
one -- by the vertical line symbol: |.

252 Derivative of the polynomial
The problem is simple – find the derivative of the polynomial. The polynomial can be large, but only with non-negative
integral powers and integer coefficients. Think about how it is better to represent it in the memory? The output should
contain no spaces and be in the descending order of powers, although the input may not comply with this rule.
Additionally, the input may contain a polynomial with unreduced terms.

253 Conway's Game of Life
Write a program, calculating the next state of the field for the Conway's Game of Life. The field is a rectangle; the
cells on the edge have the cells from the opposite side as their neighbours (the field is a torus).
Input format: First line specifies two integers separated by a space - the height and the width of the cell.
Next lines contain information on the state of the cell. A dot "." marks a dead cell, an "X" symbol − alive one.
Output format: The next state of the field, using the same markings as in input.

254 Coverting from decimal into Roman system
Find the string which represents this number in the Roman numeral system.

255 From Roman system into the decimal
Write a program that converts the number from Roman system into the decimal one.

256 Minesweeper game
A field for the minesweeper game is a grid n×m in size. The cell of the grid may or may not contain a mine.
Write a program that outputs "solved" field, i.e., for each cell, which is not a mine, it indicates the number of mines
in the neighbouring cells (including diagonal directions)

257 Number of occurrences
Given two strings s and t, consisting of lowercase letters of the Latin alphabet.
Find the number of occurrences of the line t in the line s.

258 Prime numbers
Implement the generator function primes, which will generate prime numbers in ascending order, starting from number 2.

259 Phoebe Iterson
In this problem, you have to write the fibonacci_sequence class, from which we can take the iterator, which will sort
numbers from the Fibonacci sequence.

260 Implementation of the multifilter class
Class filter is one of the most frequently used classes in Python. In the constructor it takes the two arguments a and f
– a sequence and a function, and allows to iterate only by such elements x from the sequence a that f(x) equals to True.
Let’s say that in this case the function f accepts the element x, and the element x is an accepted one.
In this problem, we ask you to implement the multifilter class, which will do the same as the standard filter class, but
will use several functions instead of a single one. The decision to accept an element will be taken based on how many
functions accept  this element, and how many don't. Let us mark these quantities as pos and neg. Let us introduce the
notion of the decision function – this is the function, which takes the two arguments – numbers pos and neg, and returns
True, if the element is allowed, and False otherwise.

261 Work with the API 2
In this problem, you need to use the API of the numbersapi.com website. You are given a set of numbers. For each of the
numbers you need to find out whether there is an interesting mathematical fact about this number. Output string
Interesting for each of the numbers that have an interesting fact, and Boring otherwise. Output the information on
numbers’ interestingness in the same order, in which these numbers are presented in the input file.

262 Work with the API
In this problem you need to use the API of artsy.net. API of the Artsy project provides information on some of the
artists, their works and exhibitions. As part of this problem you will need to get the information about the people of
art (let us briefly call them "artist"). You are given IDs of artists in the Artsy database. For each of the IDs get the
information on the name of the artists and his or her birth year. Output names of the artists in a nondecreasing order
by their birth years. If the artists have the same year of birth, output their names in lexicographic order.

263 Change Problem
Solve the Change Problem.
Input: An integer money and an array Coins=(coin1,⋯,coind).
Output: The minimum number of coins with denominations Coins that changes money.

264 The shortest distance
Find the shortest distance between the two local maximums of the sequence of natural numbers, ending with the number 0.
The number 0 itself is not included into the sequence and serves as a sign of its end. If there are no two local
maximums in the sequence, output 0. The start and the end value are not considered as a local maximums.

265 Strict local maximums
The element of a sequence is called a local maximum, if it is strictly greater than the previous and the subsequent
element of the sequence. The first and the last elements of the sequence are not the local maximum. Given the sequence
of natural numbers, ending with number 0. The number 0 itself is not included into the sequence and serves as a sign of
its end. Find the number of strict local maximums in this sequence.

266 Binary logarithm
Write a program to calculate the integer-valued log to base 2 (binary log). Input – first line contains an integer T,
next go the T lines with tests. Each tests consists of one positive integer ai<109. For each ai you need to output on a
separate line such largest number p, that 2p≤ai. It is guaranteed that ai≥1. While solving this problem, you an define
any functions you need any. Moreover, it is recommended to put the calculation of the log into a separate function.

267 Shoe store
The shoe store sells shoes of different sizes. It is known that you can wear one pair of shoes on the other one, if it
is at least three sizes larger. A buyer came to the store. You need to find the greatest number of pairs of shoes, which
the seller can offer to this buyer, so that she is able to wear them all at the same time.

268 Participants of Olympiad
During the Olympiad, each of the participants received his own identification number – an integer. The list of
participants of the Olympiad needs to be sorted by the number of points they have gained.

269 Points
Output all the given points in ascending order of their distance from the origin of the coordinate system.  The program
gets the set of points in the plane as input. First goes the number of points – n, then is a sequence of n lines, each
of which contains two numbers: the coordinates of the point. The value n does not exceed 100, all of the initial
coordinates are integers, not exceeding 1000.

270 Gradebook
Output names and surnames of the students in descending order of their average grade.First given the number of students
n, then n lines, each of which contains the surname, name and three numbers (grades for three subjects: mathematics,
physics, and informatics). The numbers in the line are separated by a single space. The grades shall take the value from
1 to 5. You need to output the surname-name pairs on a single line, separating surname and name by a single space. You
don't need to output marks. If several students have the same average grade, you need to output them in the order
specified in the input data.

271 The N-th Fibonacci number
Given the integer 1≤n≤40, you need to find the n-th Fibonacci number.

272 The N-th Fibonacci number - 2
Given the integers 1≤n≤1018 and 2≤m≤105. Find the reminder of division of the n-th Fibonacci number by m.

273 Last digit
Given the integer 1≤n≤107, you need to find the last digit of the n-th Fibonacci number. As we remember, Fibonacci
numbers grow very quickly, therefore you should be extremely careful when calculating them. In this problem, however,
we can evade this issue, because we are interested only in the last digit of the Fibonacci number: if 0≤a,b≤9
— the digits of numbers Fi and Fi+1 correspondingly, than (a+b)mod10 — the last digit of the number Fi+2.
For each of the entered number N, find the number of integers from 1 to N, relatively prime (coprime) to N.

275 The smallest integer
Given two integers 1≤a,b≤2⋅109. Find the smallest integer m, which can be divided both by a, and by b.

276 The gcd
Find the greatest common denominator of the two integers.

277 Queens
It is known that on the board 8×8 in size you can place 8 queens so that they do not beat each other. You are given the
placement of these 8 queens on the board, please find whether there is a pair of queens beating each other among them.

278 Sequence of integers
Write a program that reads the sequence of integers, separated by spaces, and then deletes from it all of the numbers
that are placed on the even positions, and after this outputs the resulting sequence in the reverse order.

279 Cyclically shift
Cyclically shift the elements of the list to the right (A[0] goes to the place of A[1], A[1] - to the place of A[2], ...
, and the last element goes to the place of A[0]).

280 Pairs
Given the list of numbers. Calculate how many pairs of elements are equal to each other. It is considered that any two
elements, which are equal to each other, form one pair that you need to count.

281 Bowling pins
N bowling pins were put in one row and numbered from left to right with numbers from 1 to N. Then K balls were thrown
at this row; i-th ball knocked down all pins with numbers from li to ri  inclusive. Find which pins remained standing.

282 Swap neighbouring items
Swap the position of neighbouring items of the list (A[0] with A[1], A[2] with A[3] etc.). If there is odd number of
elements in the list, the last element remains at its position.

283 Shift
In this problem, you need to implement the function, which shifts the contents of the array to the left for a specified
number of positions (circular shift). On input, the function takes the array, its size and the value of the shift. For
example, if on input the function receives the array: a = [ 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 ]; and you need to circularly shift it 2
positions to the left, on the output we will get the numbers in the following order: 3, 4, 5, 1, 2.
Note that the value of the shift may be zero, and may be larger than the size of the array; please take into account
all these cases.

284 Step matrix
Write the function that takes one integer number N and returns the "c" matrix, consisting of N floors. The floors are
numbered from the first one; the width of each step is equal to one row or column.

285 Synonyms
You are given the dictionary, consisting of pairs of words. Each word is a synonym to its pair-word. All the words in
the dictionary are different. Determine the synonym to a one given word.

286 Sequence of positive integers
You need to write a program that "flips" a sequence of positive integers. On input there is a sequence of space
separated positive integers. The sequence ends with zero. You are required to output the sequence in the reverse order.
The numbers should be space separated on the output. The terminating zero is simply the indicator of the end of the
sequence, it is not a part of it, i.e. you should not output it.

287 String with numbers
Input – one line of random text. The text contains words and integer numbers. Your program should calculate and output
the sum of all integers that appear in the text.

288 Substring
On input your program gets the two strings s and t, consisting of lowercase Latin letters.
Output one number – the number of occurencies of the string t in the string s.

289 Replacement
Given three strings – s, a, b, which consist of lowercase Latin letters. In one operation you may replace all
occurrences of the substring a in the string s to the string b. For example, s = "abab", a = "ab", b = "ba", then after
performing one operation the string s goes to the string "baba", after performing two operations – to the string "bbaa",
and all further operation will not alter the string s. You need to find out after how many operations there will be no
occurrences of string a in the string s, or to find out that this will not happen. Output a single number – the number
of operations after which there will be no occurrences of the string a in the string s.

If after performing any number of operation there still will be occurrences of the string a in the string s, output Impossible.

290 The second word
A user enters a phrase, which is just a bunch of words separated by commas.
Print the second word in the sentence (it is guaranteed that there's at least two words there).

291 Remove letters
A user inputs a word. Remove all letters that are in even positions in the word, and print what's left.

292 String Composition Problem
Given a string Text, its k-mer Compositionk(Text) is the collection of all k-mer substrings of Text (including repeated
k-mers). For example, Composition3(TATGGGGTGC) = {ATG, GGG, GGG, GGT, GTG, TAT, TGC, TGG}

293 Vacation problem
Write a program to figure out what day you would return, given the day you leave and how many days you will be gone.
For example:
If you leave on a Friday and you are gone for two (2) days, you would return on a Sunday.
If you leave on a Monday and you are gone for eight (8) days, you would return on a Tuesday.
If you leave on a Wednesday and you are gone 23 days, you would return on a Friday.
The program should ask for the day to leave and how many days the person will be away.

294 Two boxes
There are two boxes. First one has the size of A1×B1×C1, second one – the size of A2×B2×C2. Find whether you can place
one of these boxes inside the other one. You can turn the boxes only 90 degrees around the edges.

295 Graphics
https://ucarecdn.com/b3eff22a-e789-40fd-9489-bfb2fb389d17/
Check whether the point belongs to the given filled area (simple parabolas – y = (x-a)^2 + b )

296 Chess board
You are given two coordinates on a chess board of the first queen and two of the second. Find out, whether two queens
hit each other or not.

297 Horses on a chess board
There are two horses on a chess board and four coordintes x1, y1, x2, y2 are typed in. Determine, whether they can hit
each other or not.

298 Matrix multiplication
Given the two square matrices A, B having size n×n each (1≤n≤700). Elements of the both matrices are integers, not
exceeding 106 by absolute value. You need to find the matrix C=A×B.

299 Solution in natural numbers
On input given the number N (0⩽N⩽1012). If there exists natural numbers (or 0) x, y such that x2+y2=N, then you need to
output them. In case there are several solutions, output any of the pairs. Otherwise, output "No solution".

300 Prime factorization
Output the prime factorization of the natural number n > 1. Prime multipliers should be listed in ascending order and
separated by spaces.

301 Breakpoints in a permutation
Let  pn be a sequence of integer numbers.  If pi+1−pi is not equal to 1, then we say that (pi,pi+1) is a breakpoint.
Find the number of breakpoints in a permutation.

302 Spanish-Latin dictionary
Input data: The first line contains the only integer number N that is the number of Spanish words in the dictionary.
Then N descriptions follow: each of the descriptions is located in a separate line, where first goes a Spanish word,
next goes the space separated dash (symbol number 45), and then go the translations of this Spanish word into Latin,
separated by spaces and commas. Translations are sorted in the lexicographic order. The order of the Spanish words in
the dictionary is also lexicographic. All words consist of only the lowercase Latin letters; length of each word does
not exceed 15 characters. The total number of words at the input is not greater than 100000.
Output data: Output the Latin-Spanish dictionary, corresponding to the given one, strictly observing the format of the
input data. In particular, the first should be the translation of a lexicographically minimal Latin word, further - the
second in this order, etc. Spanish words inside the translation must also be sorted in a lexicographic order.

303 Turnpike Problem
Turnpike Problem: Given all pairwise distances between points on a line segment, reconstruct the positions of those
points.
Input: A collection of integers L.
Output: A set of integers A such that ∆A = L.

304 Adjacency matrix
Given square matrix consisting of n×n zeros and ones. Find whether this matrix can be an adjacency matrix of a simple
undirected graph.

305 Backslash
Given a sequence of lines. Output the lines, which contain the backslash "\".

306 Find a cat
Given a sequence of lines. Output all the lines, which contain "cat" as a word.

307 Swap letters
Given a sequence of lines. In each line swap the first two letters in every word, consisting of at least two letters.
A symbol from the group \w is considered a letter.

308 Two letters "z"
Given a sequence of lines. Output the lines, containing 2 letters "z" between which there are exactly three characters.

309 Find a cat - 2
You have been given a sequence of lines. Output the lines which contain "cat" as a substring at least twice.

310 Tandem repeat
Given a sequence of lines. Output the lines, which contain the word, consisting of two identical parts (tandem repeat).

311 Replacement
Given a sequence of lines. In each line replace all occurrences of the substring "human" to the substring "computer"
and output the resulting lines.

312 Binary notation
Given a sequence of lines. Output the lines, containing the binary notation of a number, divisible by 3. Binary notation
of a number is its notation in the binary numbering system. This problem can be easily solved by reduction of the string
to an integer and verification of the remainder of division by three, but still, we ask you to solve it without using
reduction to a number. Try regular expressions.

313 Multiple identical letters
Given a sequence of lines. In each line replace all occurrences of multiple identical letters by one letter. A symbol
from the group \w is considered a letter.

314 Replacement - 3
Given a sequence of lines. In each line replace the first occurrence of the word, consisting of only the Latin letters
"a" (case insensitive), to the word "argh".

315 Pattern
In this problem, you get text as an input. By using regular expressions you need to find all occurrences of the "you"
substring in it and output their number. NB. In this problem, you should also consider the case of letters.

316 Re-occurrence of a symbol
Given the list of phone numbers (each line contains one phone number). Your task is to check whether these phone numbers
are "cool": a phone number is called "cool", if it contains 3 or more same digits in a row. For example, number
19992034050 is a "cool" one, but 19500237492 is not.

317 Sets of symbols
In this problem, you get text on input. By using regular expressions you need to find all the occurrences of the "you"
or "You" substring in it and output their quantity.

318 Assignments - 2
Python code is given on input; there may be only one assignment per line, but with several variables. It is necessary to
find all uncommented assignments and for each such assignment output a space separated line number and name of each
variable (in the same order they are in the assignment).

319 Namespace
Implement a program that will simulate the work with namespaces. It is necessary to implement the support for the
creation of namespaces and adding variables into them.
In this problem, each of the namespaces has its unique text identifier - its name.
On input, your program is served the following requests:
create <namespace> <parent> –  create the new namespace with the name <namespace> inside the space <parent>
add <namespace> <var> – add the <var> variable to the namespace <namespace>
get <namespace> <var> – get the name of the namespace, from which the <var> will be taken during the request from the
<namespace>, or None, if such namespace does not exist

320 JSON format
You are given a description of the class inheritance in the JSON format.
The description represents an array of JSON objects that match the classes. Each JSON-object has the name field, which
contains the name of the class, and the parents field, which contains the list of names of the direct ancestors.

321 Using standard library
Download a JSON file and find sum of all foos. Foos are always integers.

322 XML format
You are given a description of a pyramid made of cubes in the XML format. The cubes can be of three colors: red (red),
green (green) and blue (blue). We know the color of each cube, and the cubes, located directly under it.

323 HTML-pages
There are two HTML-pages – A and B. From A we can go to B in one step, if inside A there is a link to B, i.e. inside A
there is a tag <a href="B">, possibly with additional parameters inside the tag. From A we can go to B in two steps,
if there is such document C, that from A to C we can go in one step, and from C to B we can go in one step.
On input your program gets two lines, containing the URLs to the two documents A and B. Output Yes, if you can go from
A to B for two steps, otherwise output No.
Please note that not all links inside the HTML pages can lead to an existing HTML pages.

324 HTML-file
Your program gets a link to an HTML-file as input.You need to download this file, and then find all links in a form
<a ... href="..." ... > inside it, and output a list of websites to which there is a link. In this problem a website –
is a domain name with all subdomains. I.e., this is a sequence of symbols, which follows right after the protocol
symbols, if any, up to the symbols of port or path, if any, excluding the cases with relative links in the form
<a href="../some_path/index.html">. Please output websites in the alphabetical order.

325 Message encoding
We will be dealing with a trivial example of message encoding, where the mapping of original symbols to the "code" is
simply taking the ASCII value of the symbol. For example, the "code" version of the letter 'A' would be 65.
You will be given as input a string of any length consisting of any possible ASCII characters. You must print out the
numerical ASCII value of each character of the string, separated by spaces.

326 Encode the message
We have the following symbol mappings: A ↔ 00 C ↔ 01 G ↔ 10 T ↔ 11
Given a string of A's, C's, G's, and T's, encode the message via the above mapping and print out the resulting encoded
message to standard output.

327 Decode the message
We have the following symbol mappings: A ↔ 00 C ↔ 01 G ↔ 10 T ↔ 11
Given a string of 0's and 1's, decode the message via the above mapping and print out the resulting decoded message to
standard output.

328 ASCII table
Implement the program that returns the letter, which stands after the "\" (backslash) symbol in the ASCII table by a
given distance N.

329 Assigments
In this problem Python code is served as input. Your task is to find all the assignments in the code and to output where
hey occurred, and the value of what variable they changed! Please remember that according to the PEP8 standard, the
operation of assignment (in contrast to the transfer of an argument) is separated by a single space from both sides.
Thus, as a valid assignment we consider if (something, consisting of only letters, numbers and lowerspace)=(something).
In this problem we believe that there may be only one assignment of only one variable per line.
For each assignment you need to output on a separate line – the line number (lines are numbered from one) and the name
of the variable, value of which has been changed. The line numbers must be in ascending order.

330 Remove all whitespace
Jack doesn't like when Amy puts spaces before punctuation marks, but Amy cannot possibly get rid of this habit! Help Amy
construct a regular expression, which will remove all whitespace characters before punctuation marks, not to freak out.

331 Smiley face
You need to check whether the string is a smiley face. If yes – output 1, otherwise – 0.
Smiley:
Eyes is one of ":" ";"  ">:",
nose "-" either one or none at all,
mouth is one of "{", "}", "[", "]", "(", ")", "p" at least once. One type may be repeated as many times as you want.
All symbols go precisely in the listed order, smiley does not contain any other symbols.

332 The Shortest Non-Shared Substring Problem
Finally, we ask you to solve the Shortest Non-Shared Substring Problem. Shortest Non-Shared Substring Problem:
Find the shortest substring of one string that does not appear in another string.
Input: Strings Text1 and Text2.
Output: The shortest substring of Text1 that does not appear in Text2.
CODE CHALLENGE (Extra Credit!): Solve the Shortest Non-Shared Substring Problem. (Multiple solutions may exist, in which
case you may return any one.)

333 The Longest Repeat Problem
Although the suffix tree decreases memory requirements from O(|Text|2) to O(|Text|), on average it still requires about
20 times as much memory as Text. In the case of a 3 GB human genome, 60 GB of RAM is a huge improvement over the 1 TB
that we needed to work with Trie(Patterns), but it still presents a memory challenge for most machines. This reveals a
dark secret of big-O notation, which is that it ignores constant factors. For long strings such as the human genome,
we will need to pay attention to this constant factor, since the expression O(|Text|) applies to both an algorithm with
2 · |Text| memory and an algorithm with 1000 · |Text| memory.
Yet before seeing how we can further reduce the memory needed for multiple pattern matching, we ask you to solve three
problems showing how suffix trees can be applied to other pattern matching challenges. The first such problem is the
Longest Repeat Problem.
Longest Repeat Problem: Find the longest repeat in a string.
Input: A string Text.
Output: A longest substring of Text that appears in Text more than once.
CODE CHALLENGE (Extra Credit!): Solve the Longest Repeat Problem. (Multiple solutions may exist, in which case you may
return any one.)

334 The Longest Shared Substring Problem
The second additional exercise that we will consider is the Longest Shared Substring Problem. Longest Shared Substring
Problem: Find the longest substring shared by two strings.
Input: Strings Text1 and Text2.
Output: The longest substring that occurs in both Text1 and Text2.
CODE CHALLENGE (Extra Credit!): Solve the Longest Shared Substring Problem. (Multiple solutions may exist,
 n which case you may return any one.)

335 Surface area
Given the four real (x,y) coordinates of a square A1A2A3A4, find its surface area.

336 Converting Fahrenheit to Celsius
Write a Python program to convert Fahrenheit to Celsius. C=5/9(F−32)

337 True or False?
A user enters two float numbers. Let's assume these are A and B. Print whether the following is true: A × B > A / B.
It is guaranteed that the second number (B) isn't zero. Your program should simply print "True" or "False".

338 Final amount of loan
Write a simple Python program that calculates the final amount of your loan that earns compound interest, given the
principal amount, the annual nominal interest rate, the number of times interested is compounded per year, and the
number of years. If P is the principal amount (initial investment), r is the annual nominal interest rate, n is the
number of times the interest is compounded per year, and t is the number of years, the total amount paid is
A=P(1+rn)nt
Amount owed is the principal amount multiplied by the amount one plus the annual nominal interest rate divided by n
raised to the number of times compounded multiplied by the number of years. (exponentiation)
Careful! The rules of precedence really matter in the student loan calculator problem.

339 Square of the hypotenuse
Given: Two positive integers a and b, each less than 1000. Write the integer corresponding to the square of the
hypotenuse of the right triangle whose legs have lengths a and b. Do not write Python code as an output, just a single
integer.

340 Karatsuba algorithm
Given two long integers 1≤x,y≤1050000 in decimal, output their product xy. Please note that some programming languages
(like Haskell, Python, Java) provide long arithmetic out of the box. Please do not use built-in functions,
but implement your own procedure.

341 Linear regression
Find the optimal coefficients to construct a linear regression. On input your program will get the name of the csv-file,
from which you need to read data. Your task is to calculate the vector of the coefficients of the linear regression for
he prediction of the first variable (the first column of data) by all the rest. Please remember that linear regression
model is y=β0+β1x1+⋯+βnxn. Print the coefficients of the linear regression, starting with β0, space separated.
We will verify the match with an accuracy of up to 4 digits after the decimal point.

342 Deque
Implement the deque with dynamic looped buffer. Commands are given as input in order to test the deque.
The first line contains the number of commands. Then each line contains one command.
Each command is specified as 2 integer numbers: a b.
a = 1 - push front,
a = 2 - pop front,
a = 3 - push back,
a = 4 - pop back.
If given command is pop, then the number b is expected value. If the pop command is called for an empty deque, then “-1”
is expected. You should output YES if all the expected values matched. Otherwise, if at least one expectation was not
met, then output NO.

343 Bracket sequence
Given a fragment of the bracket sequence, consisting of the symbols (){}[].
You need to find whether it is possible to continue this fragment to both sides to obtain the correct bracket sequence.
If it is possible – output the minimum correct bracket sequence, otherwise output "IMPOSSIBLE".
The maximum length of the string is 106 symbols.

344 How many numbers?
The first line contains the integer N (1≤N≤105). Next specified the array of integers from −109 to 109. Further goes
the number of requests K (1≤K≤105), next go K pairs of requests L, R  (−109≤L≤R≤109).You need to output the K numbers,
which are the responses to the requests "How many numbers in the array are located on the range from L to R?".

345 Histogram
At your individual Iris dataset take “Sepal length” (the first column) feature and find the histogram with 10 bins
(left-open intervals). Put the array of frequencies at the bins in the order of bins as your output.

346 Linear regression
Find the coefficients of linear regression Y = aX + b of the petal length Y and petal width X (features 3 and 4
respectively) as well as the determinacy coefficient between them. Output three float numbers in the following order:
a coefficient, b coefficient, determency coefficient. Separete the numbers by spaces. All problems allow to make a
default error of 0.001 in all decimal answers unless otherwise stated. It is enough to use 4 digits after the point.